Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. In today's
video, we're going to move towards reconsidering
natural numbers, which are, of course, a very
fundamental part of mathematics. It's actually
how we started this series some years ago. But
now, with our investigation of really big numbers
and the really big arithmetic that goes with
those big numbers, we've started to see that
maybe there's room for reconsideration
of what a natural number actually is.
So, here are some questions that will motivate us:
What exactly is a natural number? Can we
say precisely, concretely, and logically
what a natural number is?
Should we distinguish between
different types of natural numbers? Maybe there's
some reason for separating the different kinds
of things that we've been currently grouping
together into one big box into separate boxes
and looking at things a little bit more finely.
Should we distinguish between natural numbers and
arithmetic expressions? Arithmetic expressions
can evaluate to numbers, but there's some reason
to believe that we should treat them as something
separate from the numbers that they evaluate to.
In thinking about these questions, I think it's
instructive to keep in mind the words of a very
well-known American mathematician, Errett
Bishop (1928-1983), who was a pioneer in
what is sometimes called constructive mathematics.
We're going to be talking about his work,
especially when we get to calculus and analysis
more. He was a very important thinker in the
20th century, one who realized that the
status quo really needed to be moved in a
different direction. But he gave a very lovely
prescription here, which I think is well worth
studying. He says, "Meaningful distinctions need
to be preserved." Meaningful distinctions need
to be preserved. He's talking about a situation
where you're looking at something and there's
different kinds of objects, and there's
something fundamentally different about
them. What you don't want to do is just lump them
together, ignoring those fundamental differences
that are actually there. You want to acknowledge
those differences, those distinctions, and build
them into your description of what's going on.
Very sensible and a very useful kind of dictum.
So far in this course, we have treated natural
numbers as belonging to one type, a type called
nat. This has included actually quite a few
different kinds of objects. So we started out
by thinking of a number as a rather primitive
listing of marks or strokes on a page, perhaps
going back to some kind of Neanderthal arithmetic.
Then we moved to Hindu-Arabic numbers like 54,107,
which, of course, is very different from
this—it’s a different kind of object,
really. And then we considered more advanced
arithmetic expressions like 10 to the 300 or maybe
this expression here, or maybe even something a
bit more sophisticated with a triangle operation,
or something even more sophisticated with
one of these higher hyper-operations,
or maybe even something like this, where
the hyper-operation is now indexed with
this n to the n plus 5n to the fifth plus 3,
something like this humongous, huge number,
which we really have no control over but
nevertheless is something that we can write down.
So this is a very wide range of
possibilities, isn't it? I mean,
we're starting with something really
primitive and moving to something which
is pretty sophisticated and really beyond our
capabilities of understanding in any solid,
meaningful way. And it's natural to think,
well, is this just too wide a net? And I
think we can acknowledge that casting
such a wide net does lead to problems.
So one key problem is that most of our theorems
about numbers and their arithmetic start to break
down and then fail as we move from small,
primitive numbers through to Hindu-Arabic
numbers and through to these mega-huge
mathematical arithmetic expressions for numbers.
So, in particular, here’s a very important
example related to primes and the fundamental
theorem of arithmetic. We all know that every
natural number can be factored as a product of
prime numbers in essentially a unique way—that's
the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. Now, even
though that's been around for thousands of years
(it goes back to Euclid), it actually is a little
bit problematic. In fact, it’s a lot problematic
once we start getting to bigger numbers. This is a
curious and disconcerting aspect of the way things
are. Prime factorization is actually a technique
that only really works for small numbers—and
"small numbers" is in quotes here—numbers,
you know, that are roughly familiar to us in
our usual range of mathematical activities.
A billion, a trillion, maybe a trillion
trillion—numbers like this in this range,
prime factorization is no problem. However, if
we go significantly beyond that range, into the
realms that we've been exploring in our last few
videos, then sadly, prime factorization weakens
and ultimately breaks down completely. It weakens
and then ultimately it breaks down completely.
For example, our favorite, Z = 10 triangle
10 + 23, almost surely has no well-defined
prime factorization. The fundamental theorem of
arithmetic does not actually work with this thing.
So if we think of this as a number, then it's no
longer true that every number has a prime factor.
This thing doesn't. And I'm going to talk more
about this, but just to give you an initial idea:
So here is a picture of the number line from
0 or 1 up to Z. There it is up there, and say,
somewhere down here is 10 triangle 4. And this
is not exactly a linear scale, but this is the
range that we've seen that's sort of accessible
to us in terms of being able to write things down
explicitly in our universe, even assuming we
can employ vast hard drives at Planck scales.
Now, perhaps in God's garden, in some different
world where all of these numbers were visible—if
we can kind of imagine that for a second or try to
imagine that for a second—it's not entirely clear
that that has any meaning, but let's just play
this game. So, we'll imagine that we have God's
garden, and in God's garden, we have all of these
numbers. And there, perhaps, this number Z does
have a prime factorization, and the prime factors
will—well, there’ll be lots of them, typically,
and so many of them will be in our range, these
ones down here. And we can find some of them. For
example, 3 is a prime factor of this thing. Okay?
So, there will be hundreds, perhaps thousands,
or perhaps trillions of factors that we actually
can find, but there will also be lots of factors
which are bigger, which are beyond 10 triangle 4,
but still much smaller than this thing here. Okay?
Now, when we look at this same factorization
in our world, okay? In our world, most of these
numbers here are lost to us. We cannot write
them down because they are too big to fit in
our universe, no matter what arithmetical
system we pick or choose. In particular,
most of these primes that are appearing here
in this ideal factorization are not going to
be visible to us anymore—they're completely
inaccessible. So even though this number—yes,
we can write it down, it only takes a little bit
of room—now, primes involved in factoring it,
most of them are going to be completely
beyond us. This is very disconcerting,
right? But it's a necessary consequence of
the realization that the complexity of most
of these numbers less than Z is overwhelming
from our point of view. We've seen that,
right? That's what we established a
few videos ago when we were talking
about that. That's a consequence of this. A
consequence is that prime factorization of
something like Z is completely problematic.
It doesn't really exist in a meaningful way.
Here’s a related important example of
something that becomes problematic:
this is Euclid's theorem about an unbounded number
of primes. So, Euclid proved the fact that if you
have a finite number of primes, you can always
find another prime which is outside that given
collection of primes—sort of telling us that
the primes are unbounded, that we can always
find another one no matter how many we have.
Now, this is often taken in modern times to be
essentially equivalent to the statement that there
are an infinite number of primes. Okay? So, it is
commonly asserted in 20th-century mathematics
that there are an infinite number of primes.
People, this is rubbish, okay? It’s nonsense. It's
completely untrue. And the reason it's completely
untrue is very simple: It's because there are
not an infinite number of any things. We are not
living in an infinite world. There's nothing
about our world which is infinite—at least,
there's no evidence to suggest that there's
anything about our world which is infinite in
any aspect whatsoever. There are
not an infinite number of frogs;
there are not an infinite number of electrons;
there are not an infinite number of ideas;
there are not an infinite number of theorems;
there are not an infinite number of people;
there are not an infinite number of ghosts;
there are not an infinite number of anything,
including prime numbers. We can see that when we
start to explore these bigger numbers, all right?
So, if we never go beyond sort of the comfort
zone, then we can kind of imagine that this
fairy tale idea that we have just keeps on going
in some kind of uniform way. But we've seen that
that's very far from being the case, that we
actually have a completely different experience
of numbers and their arithmetic once we start
seriously exploring bigger numbers. And what we've
seen is that the numbers that we have control of
become fewer and fewer and sparser and sparser,
and they start to thin out and become ever more
bizarre. And then, ultimately, beyond that point,
there’s a point where things drizzle out and
stop altogether. And we can't say precisely
when that happens or where it happens, but happen
it will because of the limited nature of the world
in which we live. It's just a consequence
of facing the reality that the physicists,
the astronomers, the cosmologists
are telling us that we inhabit.
So, in fact, I claim that to be very precise,
there are no primes bigger than Z = 10 triangle
10 + 23. There are no primes bigger than this
number. It's not just that there are bigger
primes, but we can't find them—no, I assert that
it's actually the case that there are no primes
bigger than this thing. There are just no numbers
that can be expressible in our universe which have
the property that they are bigger than this and
are also prime. This is a disconcerting statement,
of course, and you may say, well, it's just
a matter of time before our computers get big
enough and we'll be able to explore these regions
and find primes—no, okay? You're not gonna find
a prime bigger than this. Future viewers, am
I right? Maybe viewers from a thousand years
from now, I'm willing to bet that you have not
found any primes bigger than this number. And
probably it's more evident to you that I'm
right—there are no big primes of this kind.
So, what about Euclid's proof? So, Euclid's
proof asserts that no matter how many finite
primes you have, you can always find a bigger
one. Well, it turns out—and we'll have to have
a look at this—that Euclid's proof contains a
subtle logical error. It's not a correct proof,
in fact, okay? If we look closely at it, not
just kind of quickly look at it, but actually
look very carefully at what the proof is telling
us and what it's telling us to do, we see that
there are some subtle assumptions built in that,
upon closer examination, aren't supportable. So,
the proof is not, in fact, correct. The
proof is correct for smaller numbers—yes,
I'll buy that. But eventually, the
proof reaches a stage, some bound,
where the arguments no longer apply, and the proof
breaks down. And in fact, the theorem is no longer
a theorem—it’s just plainly false. There are no
prime numbers bigger than 10 triangle 10 + 23.
But it's not just results that go back to Euclid
that are problematic—many modern so-called
theorems in number theory are simply incorrect
as currently stated. They are simply not true,
and they rely on a false understanding of the
nature of the natural numbers. There really
is a serious misconception floating around that
basically pervades all of modern number theory.
All right? So almost all of these fancy modern
theorems are, in fact, limited in extent. They
need to be recast in a more limited, careful
way. The bounds of possible applicability of
these theorems need to be investigated, okay?
Blanket statements are fraught with difficulty.
So, another serious problem is induction,
where we try to prove things by this process
of starting with one and then proving things
one at a time. So, this whole enterprise becomes
problematic if we can't actually get to the
numbers that we're interested in, say like Z,
by counting from 1 to Z one step at a time.
Clearly, if your proof that something is
true for Z involves starting with 1 and then
proceeding one step at a time, from 1 to 2,
from 2 to 3, from 3 to 4, and then you keep
going until you finally get to Z—if that's
your proof technique, and then you find out that,
in fact, wait a minute, most of the numbers that
we encounter between 1 and Z are, in fact, not
actually reachable. We can't actually get to
them because they're so vast they don't fit into
the universe. Then that clearly breaks down the
logical argument, right? That we no longer
have proven our fact for Z; we've proven it
only to the extent that we've been able to go
from 1 to whatever number we're considering,
one step at a time. It's a logical necessity
that if you're only gonna go one step at a time,
you can only make statements about things that
you can get to by going one step at a time.
So, we need to reconsider a lot of things
in number theory. We need to think much
more carefully and clearly. We need to take into
consideration the real dichotomy between small,
comfortable, familiar arithmetic and this
much more problematic, almost inaccessible
arithmetic that we eventually get to when we
start to explore far outside our comfort zone.
And one way to start to try to make things more
precise and to nail things down more clearly is
to go back to the very fundamental questions
that we started this video with, which is:
What is exactly a natural number? This is at the
heart of the matter—what is a natural number?
Well, we have at least three identifiable,
different ways of looking at natural numbers. So,
our first tier is really the one
that we started this series with,
where we were thinking about natural numbers in
a very primitive fashion—basically as a sequence
of strokes or marks on a page. And that's
sufficient for us to define an arithmetic
involving addition and multiplication in a
relatively simple, kind of naive way. We,
in fact, don't actually even need to have names
for such things. We could say this is mark,
mark, mark plus mark, mark, mark, mark equals
mark, mark, mark, mark, mark, mark, mark, mark,
mark. And a little bit of a departure from what
I did in that very first video is that now I'm
putting these collections of strokes or marks
in little boxes because we're familiar with
multisets. So, we're using a multiset kind
of idea here—this is a multiset of marks,
okay? And that sort of makes things a little bit
tighter. And of course, we can then sort of recast
this in terms of our familiar Hindu-Arabic
formulation—this is really 7 + 4 = 11,
this is really 3 times 4 = 12. But then we can
sort of represent this as just being a shorthand
for this more fundamental manifestation
of the arithmetic of natural numbers.
So, with this view, a natural number is really,
well, it's a bunch of strokes or marks on a page,
perhaps enclosed in some kind of box or
container or multiset. And then another
big step up is to go to the Hindu-Arabic natural
number presentation that we're familiar with,
that we actually use in everyday life, where
numbers now are things like 34 or 152. And the
arithmetic is done at this level, where that
we learn in primary school: 34 + 152 = 186,
57 times 14 = 798, and so on. And although there's
no natural connection between these two things,
there's also a natural separation. And there
are some senses in which this is a more
sophisticated and more wide-ranging
approach to numbers than this one.
And then another big step is to consider
just arithmetic expressions. So, for example,
we could say, look at this number here, 3 to the
fifth minus 14 squared. And that's an arithmetic
expression for a number. Here's another arithmetic
expression: 6 factorial. And here's another
arithmetic expression: 13 times 59. Okay? So
here, we're working with some kind of arithmetic
expressions, and we can do arithmetic with these
arithmetic expressions as evidenced here. But
you can see that this is going to be much more
challenging to set up because we have to decide,
well, what kinds of expressions we're going to
allow, what are the rules that we're going to
adopt, when are we going to decide when
two expressions are equal, and so on.
So although we could, and perhaps we should,
talk about this, it might be useful for us
to really separate what we currently have.
So currently, we jumble all these together,
and we say, "I'll consider this number here,
that's 4, and consider this number 798,
and consider this number 13 times 59." We
treat them all as more or less just different
manifestations of the same thing. But what I'm
saying here is that what we've been talking
about really leads us to want to separate things
into different levels so that there are different
kinds of natural numbers. And we might actually
introduce different types for what currently is
just only one type. So, we could say reserve nat
to be a primitive natural number of this kind,
and we could use num to represent Hindu-Arabic
natural numbers, and we could introduce something
like num expression or num X to denote some kind
of arithmetic expression, although we would have
to be more precise about the nature of this kind
of object. So this way, we would have different
levels of natural numbers and not just the single,
all-embracing container that we currently have.
So, let’s say a little bit about that first
type, the primitive natural numbers. So,
note that we are going to use M-sets or multisets
as containers for that, so that we really are
adopting this data structure point of view here.
And this is another example of the very useful
application of multisets: that they give us a
vehicle for introducing and creating, in fact,
the natural numbers, okay? So, this is very
different from the set-theoretical formulation
as we described a few videos ago, attributing it
to John von Neumann—the idea that a natural number
is a set, a set of sets, and everything is built
up from the empty set in terms of sets of empty
sets and other sets, and so on, nested inside
each other in a rather complicated way. So here,
the possibility is that we can simplify things
dramatically because we can use the M-set
notation. Then we only have these single primitive
objects, which we might call a stroke or a mark,
which then go on to populate our M-sets
and create our natural numbers for us.
So here then is a definition, okay? A definition
of what a natural number is—actually, more
precisely, what a primitive natural number is,
if we want to be a little bit more specific. So,
a primitive natural number is an M-set of marks.
This is what we can call a mark: an M-set of marks
is a natural number, and this type nat is going
to be now our type that represents a primitive
natural number. So, an M-set of marks is specified
by writing it down clearly and completely. There's
now only one way of really officially
writing down a primitive natural number,
which is to write it out like this—it's an M-set
of marks. So, you have to make all the marks,
and you put them in a square bracket box, and
that is a natural number. That more precisely is
a primitive natural number, an element of nat. So
note that this is similar but somewhat different
from our very first lecture, MF1, in that
lecture we hadn't talked about data structures,
we didn't have the idea of sets or lists or
ordered sets or multisets, and we didn't put our
strings of marks or strokes in a box or container.
But now that we are familiar with multisets,
and we are a little bit comfortable with them, and
we recognize that they're flexible objects, we are
gonna do that. So, we're going to shift gears
just a little bit—we're allowed to do that—and
we're going to now regard a natural number as
an M-set of marks in the usual M-set notation.
So, M-sets, of course, I remind you, allow
repetition—we definitely need that because
there's only one type of thing that's happening
in here—and there's no commas because the order
doesn't matter. You can interchange the order and
it doesn't matter—it doesn’t change things. Okay,
so this is really a fundamentally new but
simple approach to a really fundamental
object in mathematics: the natural numbers, and
how we're going to think about natural numbers,
okay? And it's well worth pondering about the
pros and cons of this proposed definition.
So, let me reiterate that again because it's
rather important. So, in Math Foundations 1,
we did define a natural number as a string of
ones, and we expressed this natural number as
1 1 1 1. So, we considered the stroke as being
1, okay? So here, we're departing from that. So,
our basic object is this stroke or mark, which
is not to be identified with the number 1,
which is rather this. So, the number 1 is
the M-set consisting of a single mark. Here,
I've written it again, okay? So,
this mark here is not the number
1. The number 1 is now the M-set consisting
of that single mark—that’s the number 1. So,
this is a departure from what we did before,
utilizing our familiarity with M-sets.
There are some clear advantages in making our
natural numbers as multisets of these strokes
or marks. So, in particular, the boundaries
are clear, so there's less ambiguity or
possible confusion when we have lots of different
natural numbers sort of on the same page or on the
same line. If we don't have the boundaries, then
there's more likelihood that these things will run
together, especially if we're wanting to juxtapose
them or get them close to each other. So,
in particular, for multiplying M-sets, say like
this, then it's completely clear what we're doing,
and we can get rid of the multiplication
sign and just juxtapose the two M-sets. So,
that's now possible. But if you didn't have
M-sets there, then this would be a rather
dangerous thing to do because it’s easy to
confuse this one with what we would call 7.
And there's another interesting consequence of
working with M-sets because we've seen from our
experience that in the world of M-sets, there is
a distinguished M-set, which is the empty M-set,
okay? So, this empty M-set, which we denote
like this, is both natural and useful. And so,
if we're going to define a primitive natural
number as an M-set of marks, then it follows
that we should allow the possibility of
having an empty M-set of marks. And so,
that means that what we usually think of as zero
naturally plays a role here. It naturally arises
as a type of natural number, which is, of course,
different from the historical story. And it's also
different from what we did in the first part
of this series—we have up till now not treated
zero as a natural number. But now we see that
when we make this shift to this data structure
point of view, regarding numbers as M-sets
of these more fundamental marks or strokes,
then it’s natural to allow zero in the
picture, and so zero becomes a natural number.
So, this is a shift that we're making, and I
don't apologize for it. I think we're open to
the possibility of changing our minds. It's
very important to have the ability and the
willingness to change your mind. So, let's do
things a little bit differently from the way we
thought we were gonna do things before, right?
This is mathematics; it's not set in stone. We
can proceed, erase something, change things,
reconsider, look at things a few years later,
and say, "Oh, actually, we should have
done this, this, and this." And we need
to be prepared to then go back and actually do
things the better way—to rub out what we've got
and to write in a new and better way. That, of
course, applies to a lot of modern mathematics.
And, of course, the computer scientists can now
rejoice because now zero is part of the natural
number system, which computer scientists enjoy
because they like starting to count with zero. So,
this is very exciting. So, we've harnessed our
understanding of data structures for something
very concrete and actually fundamental—namely,
we are pinning arithmetic onto the multiset
framework. We are creating natural numbers
from a relatively simple kind of ingredient,
and with this very important data structure
kind of thing in mind of a multiset.
In our next video, we want to do something that's
even more fundamental. We want to go down right
to the bottom of the core of mathematics. So,
the natural numbers are pretty close to being
at the core of mathematics, but I claim that
there's really something underneath the natural
numbers that’s sort of implicit in what we've
been talking about here, but I want to really
identify what it is. So, there’s a fundamental
dichotomy in mathematics, a kind of a yin-yang,
which hasn’t properly been identified.
We need to put our fingers very clearly
on this and really identify this fundamental
dichotomy, which is at the core of mathematics,
and that we are going to use to build up our
arithmetic in, I think, a beautiful way. So,
in our next video, it's going to be a rather
important one in the sense that we're going
to really introduce an almost philosophically
novel way of thinking about what mathematics
ultimately is really about once we get right to
the bottom—what's the essence of mathematics?
We're going to find out next
time. I hope you'll join me for
that. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.